yuzu Progress report December 2020 (#241)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-dec-2020/index.md

+++
date = "2021-01-07T12:00:00-03:00"
title = "Progress Report December 2020"
author = "Honghoa"
coauthor = "GoldenX86"
forum = 0
+++ 

Happy New Year, dear yuz-ers! 2020 finally tumbled down. Follow us for a summary of the last changes yuzu saw in 2020, and a small preview of what will come!

<!--more-->

## General improvements and bug fixes

[epicboy](https://github.com/ameerj) has been busy squashing bugs, in this case [killing two with one PR.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5201) In some instances, we were trying to read data from an nvflinger buffer, before it even existed. By adding a check, `Yoshi’s Crafted World` now boots, albeit with several graphical glitches.

> This PR also fixes how buffers in general are accessed, making several games boot for the first time. Some examples include but are not limited to `Katana ZERO`, `DELTARUNE Chapter 1`, `Dragon Ball FighterZ` and `Wonder Boy: The Dragon’s Trap`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PR also fixes how buffers in general are accessed, making several games boot for the first time. Some examples include but are not limited to: `Katana ZERO`, `DELTARUNE Chapter 1`, `Dragon Ball FighterZ` and `Wonder Boy: The Dragon’s Trap`.
```

{{< imgs
	"./katanazero.png| "
  >}}

{{< imgs
	"./wonderboy.png| Now booting!"
  >}}

> A PSA for our Intel graphics users, the (at the time of writing) latest `27.20.100.9126` Windows driver version adds support for not only the much needed `VK_EXT_robustness2`, but also `VK_EXT_custom_border_color` improving performance and stability with the former extension and solving rendering issues in `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild` in the latter. Nothing better than free improvements for our integrated graphics crew running Vulkan. Latest is best!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A PSA for our Intel graphics users, (at the time of writing) the latest `27.20.100.9126` Windows driver version adds support for not only the much needed `VK_EXT_robustness2`, but also `VK_EXT_custom_border_color` improving performance and stability with the former extension and solving rendering issues in `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild` in the latter. Nothing better than free improvements for our integrated graphics crew running Vulkan. Latest is best!
```

What was promised is debt, Linux distributions compatibility, and the dependency issues that come with it, have been a long problem for our Tux users, until now. [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) has given us [AppImage builds,](https://appimage.org/) simplifying the installation process considerably, eliminating any dependencies issues, and bringing back support for Ubuntu 18.04, Debian Buster, CentOS 8, and similar older distributions.
In the future, Early Access will finally be able to be distributed pre-compiled like this. Thanks to the reduced source code compilation work hours, the CPU Union approves of this change.

> During the time the Texture Cache Rewrite spent in Early Access, several regressions were being fixed. One of the notorious ones is related to the camera rune in `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the time the Texture Cache Rewrite spent in Early Access, several regressions have been fixed. One of the notorious ones is related to the camera rune in `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild`.
```

{{< imgs
	"./camera.png| "
  >}}

> As you can clearly see with [Rodrigo’s](https://github.com/ReinUsesLisp)... art, the game informs two different size values for the same texture, named `pitch` and `width`, so yuzu didn’t transfer needed information between them as yuzu considered them different textures. By changing this behaviour, entities like animals, flowers, enemies, etc., are properly registered by the camera now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can clearly see with [Rodrigo’s](https://github.com/ReinUsesLisp)... art, the game informs two different size values for the same texture, named `pitch` and `width`, so yuzu didn’t transfer needed information between them as it considered them different textures. By changing this behaviour, entities like animals, flowers, enemies, etc. are properly registered by the camera now.
```

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Tony get the boulder (The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild)"
    "./botwbug.png"
    "./botwfix.png"
  >}}

There were some crashes when exiting yuzu that were related to the telemetry process. [Tobi](https://github.com/FearlessTobi) ported a fix from [Citra](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra) that [changes the type of `AddField` to a string,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5127) squashing one bug down.

> A common issue that users reported when asking for support is that configuration changes are lost if yuzu crashes. [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) changed this behaviour, to simply [save the current settings before a game boots.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5217) Saves several headaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common issue that users reported when asking for support is that configuration changes are lost if yuzu crashes. [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) changed this behaviour, to simply [save the current settings before a game boots.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5217) This change saves several headaches.
```

> [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) implemented the [new OSS fonts](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5200) [Rei](https://github.com/Its-Rei) has been working on. With this, users no longer require to dump the Switch firmware to get proper button fonts in-game. The firmware dumping process is still needed for games that have Mii related content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) implemented the [new OSS fonts](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5200) that [Rei](https://github.com/Its-Rei) has been working on. With this, users no longer require to dump the Switch firmware to get proper button fonts in-game. The firmware dumping process is still needed for games that have Mii related content.
```

    "./smm2fontbug.png"
    "./smm2fontfix.png"
  >}}

A separate PR [added +/-](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5205) to the fonts.

{{< single-title-imgs
    "THE anime swordsman (Super Smash Bros. Ultimate)"
    "./smashfontbug.png"
    "./smashfontfix.png"
  >}}

{{< imgs
	"./fonts.png| Some insight in the process behind this."
  >}}

Some games report the wrong device handle when sending vibration signals, like `NEKOPARA Vol. 3` (don’t Google this series). [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) fixed this by [validating the device handles before use.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5190) Man of culture.

## Kernel Rewrites

This month has seen some important changes on yuzu’s kernel, with a focus on refactoring the code for thread management and synchronization. [bunnei](https://github.com/bunnei) started working on these changes two months ago, as covered on the previous progress report. Although they are a bit technical, these modifications are essential to emulate the Nintendo Switch accurately, and they also improve the quality of yuzu's code so it's easier to work for the devs.

> First on the list, we have a change to [ensure safe memory access for threads](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5206). When multiple threads are running at the same time, there might be what is called a `Race Condition`: one thread modifies data that is currently being read by another thread, which could result in faulty or undefined behavior, since the second thread would be retrieving the wrong data or might even rewrite a different value, compromising the routine of the first thread. yuzu emulates the internal memory of the Nintendo Switch through a type of abstract data structure called `Page Table`, which works as a virtual layer between the physical and the emulated memory, by mapping these addresses in a "contiguous table" that can be easily accessed by the programmer without having to check where everything is stored in the real memory. Most of the code to manage operations related to memory were written before multicore CPU and asynchronous GPU were implemented, so naturally they didn't have any guard for memory-safe thread access. With this PR, bunnei introduced a lock that alleviates a race condition where the data in the memory pages was being accessed at the same time as the GPU was operating on them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, there is an improvement to yuzu [ensuring safe memory access across threads](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5206). A `Race Condition` happens when multiple threads are running simultaneously, and one thread modifies data while another thread accesses it. Race conditions can cause faulty or unexpected behaviour: a thread can retrieve partial data or even overwrite changes made by another. yuzu emulates the Nintendo Switch's internal memory using a type of abstract data structure called a `Page Table`, which works as a virtual layer between the physical and the emulated memory. It maps these addresses in a "contiguous table" that lets the programmer access memory easily without checking where actual memory stores everything. Most memory management operations were written before multicore CPU and asynchronous GPU were implemented. There was only a single thread back then, so there were no guards for thread-safe memory access. bunnei introduced a lock in this PR to alleviate a race condition where the data in the memory pages was being accessed while the GPU was operating on them.
```

> bunnei has also been rewriting the [kernel scheduler](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5131) based on `Mesosphere`, the kernel implementation of [Atmosphère](https://github.com/Atmosphere-NX/Atmosphere) (a custom firmware for the Nintendo Switch). Modern operating systems run many processes simultaneously while operational, however the CPU can only process one of them at any given time. The scheduler is an elemental piece of the kernel, as it is in charge of swapping CPU access to the different processes and choosing in which order this happens. As Atmosphère is intended to run in the hardware, all its components are properly reverse engineered, which ensures our scheduler will behave correctly too. This PR will facilitate porting other parts of Mesosphere in the future, too. This, in turn, will make yuzu's kernel match Horizon OS more closely. We all owe a big thank you to the people working on Atmosphère, as their reverse engineering efforts facilitate the work needed to implement these services in emulators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bunnei has also been rewriting the [kernel scheduler](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5131) based on `Mesosphere`, the kernel reimplementation of [Atmosphère](https://github.com/Atmosphere-NX/Atmosphere) (a custom firmware for the Nintendo Switch). Modern operating systems run many processes simultaneously while operational, however the CPU can only process one of them at any given time. The scheduler is an elemental piece of the kernel, as it is in charge of swapping CPU access to the different processes and choosing in which order this happens. As Atmosphère is intended to run on the hardware, all its components are properly reverse engineered, which ensures our scheduler will behave correctly too. This PR will facilitate porting other parts of Mesosphere in the future, too. This, in turn, will make yuzu's kernel match Horizon OS more closely. We all owe a big thank you to the people working on Atmosphère, as their reverse engineering efforts facilitate the work needed to implement these services in emulators.
```

> bunnei has also been rewriting the [kernel scheduler](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5131) based on `Mesosphere`, the kernel implementation of [Atmosphère](https://github.com/Atmosphere-NX/Atmosphere) (a custom firmware for the Nintendo Switch). Modern operating systems run many processes simultaneously while operational, however the CPU can only process one of them at any given time. The scheduler is an elemental piece of the kernel, as it is in charge of swapping CPU access to the different processes and choosing in which order this happens. As Atmosphère is intended to run in the hardware, all its components are properly reverse engineered, which ensures our scheduler will behave correctly too. This PR will facilitate porting other parts of Mesosphere in the future, too. This, in turn, will make yuzu's kernel match Horizon OS more closely. We all owe a big thank you to the people working on Atmosphère, as their reverse engineering efforts facilitate the work needed to implement these services in emulators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bunnei has also been rewriting the [kernel scheduler](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5131) to be based on `Mesosphere`, the Nintendo Switch kernel reimplementation of [Atmosphère](https://github.com/Atmosphere-NX/Atmosphere) (a custom firmware for the Nintendo Switch). Modern operating systems run many processes simultaneously, however, a single CPU core can only process one of them at any given time. The scheduler is an elemental piece of the kernel, as it is in charge of swapping CPU access to the different processes and choosing in which order this happens. As Atmosphère is intended to run on the hardware, all its components are properly reverse engineered, which ensures our scheduler will behave correctly too. This PR will facilitate porting other parts of Mesosphere in the future, too. This, in turn, will make yuzu's kernel match Horizon OS more closely. We all owe a big thank you to the people working on Atmosphère, as their reverse engineering efforts facilitate the work needed to implement these services in emulators.
```
# ^ this is based on Ren's suggestion.

> As a follow-up to this rewrite, bunnei reworked the way service calls were implemented in yuzu, by allocating their calls in their own [individual service threads](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5208). There are many services running in the background on the Nintendo Switch, and they are in charge of initializing and managing specific tasks, such as audio, graphics, user input, networking, etc. yuzu emulates these services through HLE - High Level Emulation. This means that, instead of dumping the binary code of these routines from the Nintendo Switch and translating their instructions so that a PC can run them, the programmer reimplements the functionality of these services in C++. Thus, HLE works like a "black box": these services are called whenever there's a request from the games, and they send (or ask) for the corresponding data, even though internally they may be different to how the service was originally implemented in hardware. But, as long as the information requested or sent through the service is valid and processed appropriately, the system is being emulated correctly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a follow-up to this rewrite, bunnei reworked the way service calls were implemented in yuzu, by allocating their calls in their own [individual service threads](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5208). Many services are running in the background on the Nintendo Switch. They are in charge of initializing and managing specific tasks, such as audio, graphics, user input, networking, etc. yuzu emulates these services through HLE - High Level Emulation. This means that, instead of dumping the binary code of these routines from the Nintendo Switch and translating their instructions so that a PC can run them, the programmer reimplements the functionality of these services in C++. Thus, HLE works like a "black box": these services are called whenever there's a request from the games, and they send (or ask) for the corresponding data, even though internally they may be different to how the service was originally implemented in hardware. But, as long as the information requested or sent through the service is valid and processed appropriately, the system is being emulated correctly.
```

> These service processes are independent of each other, so they are called asynchronously by games. But, prior to this PR, they were all being processed in the `CoreTiming` thread -- a thread that is used to process events at certain times in the future (for example, when a frame completes rendering). This meant that these processes would be called by games but they would not be processed until the `CoreTiming` thread was run, which resulted in these requests piling up in a queue and possibly introducing lag if the queue wasn't emptied fast enough. Thanks to the changes in this PR, each of these processes was moved to their own thread and is processed more quickly. An immediate benefit of this change is that load times improve significantly, and input lag is also reduced. But another important perk is that this implementation is more accurate, as it resembles the behavior of services in the Nintendo Switch. GPU emulation also runs in its own thread now, which is synchronized on GPU pushes and flushes. This means that `async GPU` can be decoupled from multicore and these settings can now be toggled independently from each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These service processes are independent of each other, so they are called asynchronously by games. But, prior to this PR, they were all being processed in the `CoreTiming` thread -- a thread that is used to process events at certain times in the future (for example, when a frame completes rendering). This meant that games would call these processes but they would not be processed until the `CoreTiming` thread was run, which resulted in these requests piling up in a queue and possibly introducing lag if the queue wasn't emptied fast enough. Thanks to the changes in this PR, each of these processes was moved to their own thread and is processed more quickly. An immediate benefit of this change is that load times improve significantly, and input lag is also reduced. But another important perk is that this implementation is more accurate, as it resembles the behavior of services in the Nintendo Switch. GPU emulation also runs on its own thread now, which is synchronized on GPU pushes and flushes. This means that `async GPU` can be decoupled from multicore and these settings can now be toggled independently from each other.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These service processes are independent of each other, so games call them asynchronously. But before this PR, all of these services were all being processed in the `CoreTiming` thread -- a thread that is used to process events at certain times in the future (for example, when a frame completes rendering). This meant that games would call these processes, but they would not be processed until the `CoreTiming` thread was run, which resulted in these requests piling up in a queue and possibly introducing lag if the queue wasn't emptied fast enough.

Thanks to the changes in this PR, each of these processes was moved to their own thread and is processed more quickly. An immediate benefit of this change is that load times improve significantly, and input lag is also reduced. But another important perk is that this implementation is more accurate, as it resembles the behaviour of services in the Nintendo Switch. GPU emulation also runs on its own thread now, which is synchronized on GPU pushes and flushes. This means that `async GPU` can be decoupled from multicore and these settings can now be toggled independently from each other.
```
# ^ based on Ren's suggestion

> Finally, as a continuation to the previous two PRs, comes the [rewrite of the kernel synchronization primitives](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5266) based on their implementations in Mesosphere -- namely, `Synchronization Objects`, `Condition Variables` and `Address Arbiters`. An in-depth explanation of how these mechanisms work escapes the scope of this report, but essentially they are tools used by threads in different processes to communicate with each other and be synchronized properly. The major benefit of these changes is that a lot of code that was being carried over from Citra (and that required major work arounds to make it function properly with multicore) has been changed in favor of mechanisms more appropriate for how yuzu works, besides making it closer to how the `Horizon OS` of the Nintendo Switch works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, as a continuation to the previous two PRs, comes the [rewrite of the kernel synchronization primitives](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5266) based on their implementations in Mesosphere -- namely, `Synchronization Objects`, `Condition Variables` and `Address Arbiters`. An in-depth explanation of how these mechanisms work goes beyond the scope of this report, but essentially they are tools used by threads in different processes to communicate with each other and be synchronized properly. The major benefit of these changes is that a lot of code that was being carried over from Citra (and that required major workarounds to make it function properly with multicore) has been changed in favor of mechanisms more appropriate for how yuzu works, besides making it closer to how the `Horizon OS` of the Nintendo Switch works.
```

> Finally, as a continuation to the previous two PRs, comes the [rewrite of the kernel synchronization primitives](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5266) based on their implementations in Mesosphere -- namely, `Synchronization Objects`, `Condition Variables` and `Address Arbiters`. An in-depth explanation of how these mechanisms work goes beyond the scope of this report, but essentially they are tools used by threads in different processes to communicate with each other and be synchronized properly. The major benefit of these changes is that a lot of code that was being carried over from Citra (and that required major workarounds to make it function properly with multicore) has been changed in favor of mechanisms more appropriate for how yuzu works, besides making it closer to how the `Horizon OS` of the Nintendo Switch works.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, as a continuation to the previous two PRs, comes the [rewrite of the kernel synchronization primitives](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5266) based on their implementations in Mesosphere -- namely, `Synchronization Objects`, `Condition Variables` and `Address Arbiters`. An in-depth explanation of how these mechanisms work goes beyond the scope of this report, but essentially they are tools used by threads in different processes to communicate with each other and be synchronized properly. The major benefit of these changes is that a lot of code that was being carried over from Citra (and that required major workarounds to make it function properly with multicore) has been changed in favour of mechanisms more appropriate for how yuzu works, besides making it closer to how the `Horizon OS` of the Nintendo Switch works.
```

> Going in hand with these synchronization changes, [epicboy](https://github.com/ameerj) introduced a PR to [incorporate a syncpoint manager for nvdec](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5237). This utilizes the tools mentioned previously to implement a more accurate GPU-CPU synchronization mechanism, which is crucial to avoid race conditions when async operations are being performed by the emulator when decoding video.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Going in hand with these synchronization changes, [epicboy](https://github.com/ameerj) introduced a PR to [incorporate a syncpoint manager for nvdec](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5237). This utilizes the tools mentioned previously to implement a more accurate GPU-CPU synchronization mechanism. It is crucial to avoid race conditions when async operations are being performed by the emulator when decoding a video.
```

## UI changes

Finally, a very needed User Interface change, [language support](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5239) is here. Thanks to work done by [Tobi](https://github.com/FearlessTobi) and many, *many* members of the community from around the globe, we can now offer support for 11 different languages, plus regional variations. ¡Muchas gracias!

{{< imgs
	"./language.png| You can find this in Emulation > Configure > General > UI > Interface language"
  >}} 

Anyone is welcome to help [expand the available language list.](https://www.transifex.com/yuzu-emulator/yuzu)

> For our command line or shortcut lovers. [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) adds [command line arguments.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5229) Current options are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our command-line or shortcut lovers, [Morph](https://github.com/Morph1984) adds [command-line arguments.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5229) Current options are:
```

- `yuzu.exe "path_to_game"` - Launches a game at `path_to_game`.
- `yuzu.exe -f` - Launches the next game in fullscreen.
- `yuzu.exe -g "path_to_game"` - Launches a game at `path_to_game`.
- `yuzu.exe -f -g "path_to_game"` - Launches a game at `path_to_game` in fullscreen.

Feel free to create desktop shortcuts of all of your games!

> Thinking of our fast typers, [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) added several [menubar access hot-keys](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5223). Now for example an user can press `Alt + F, R, 2` to load the second most played game. Look ma, no mouse!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thinking of our fast typers, [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) added several [menubar access hot-keys](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5223). Now, for example, an user can press `Alt + F, R, 2` to load the second most played game. Look Ma! No mouse!
```

> Thinking of our fast typers, [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) added several [menubar access hot-keys](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5223). Now, for example, an user can press `Alt + F, R, 2` to load the second most played game. Look Ma! No mouse!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thinking of our fast typers, [toastUnlimited](https://github.com/lat9nq) added several [menubar access hot-keys](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5223). Now, for example, a user can press `Alt + F, R, ENTER` to load the most recently played game. Look Ma! No mouse!
```
:)

> [german77](https://github.com/german77) added the option to [resize yuzu’s window to 1920x1080](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5178), on top of the traditional 1280x720. This ensures a perfect 1:1 pixel ratio with native 1080p games while playing windowed, for those with high resolution displays.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[german77](https://github.com/german77) added the option to [resize yuzu’s window to 1920x1080](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5178), on top of the traditional 1280x720. This ensures a perfect 1:1 pixel ratio with native 1080p games while playing windowed, for those with high-resolution displays.
```

{{< imgs
	"./resize.png| "
  >}} 

## Input changes

[german77](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5178) is back in action with a couple of input improvements.

> Adding a way to invert an analog stick axis was a problem we didn’t expect to have on XBox and PlayStation controllers, but some alternative brands don’t seem to follow the specifications very closely. [Now if you right click an axis, you get the option to invert it.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5233) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding a way to invert an analog stick axis was a problem we didn’t expect to have on Xbox and PlayStation controllers, but some alternative brands don’t seem to follow the specifications very closely. [Now if you right click on an axis, you get the option to invert it.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5233) 
```

> Adding a way to invert an analog stick axis was a problem we didn’t expect to have on Xbox and PlayStation controllers, but some alternative brands don’t seem to follow the specifications very closely. [Now if you right click on an axis, you get the option to invert it.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5233) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding a way to invert an analog stick axis was a problem we did not expect to have on Xbox and PlayStation controllers, but some alternative brands don’t seem to follow the specifications very closely. Now if you right-click on an axis, you get the [option to invert it.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5233) 
```

{{< imgs
	"./invert.png| "
  >}} 

This is also a great way to invert a camera if a game doesn’t allow it in its own settings, for example in `Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast`.

> Analog triggers were sometimes mapped inverted to what the user intended. As a way to avoid some bad moments to our users, now [the program takes two samples when mapping an analog trigger,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5265) to better determine the direction of movement. This was [ported from Citra](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/5509), so thanks guys!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Analog triggers were sometimes mapped inverted to what the user intended. As a way to avoid some bad moments to our users, now [the program takes two samples when mapping an analog trigger,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5265) to better determine the direction of movement. This was [ported from Citra](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/5509), so thanks, guys!
```

> A few games like `Voez` and `The Room` require specific touch gestures, and to achieve that, [multitouch support was added.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5270) With this, yuzu now offers support for up to 16 touch inputs with keyboard, touch screen or UDP services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few games like `Voez` and `The Room` require specific touch gestures, and to achieve that, [multitouch support was added.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5270) With this, yuzu now offers support for up to 16 touch inputs with the keyboard, touch screen or via UDP services.
```

{{< imgs
	"./room.png| "
  >}} 

## Preliminary work for the Buffer Cache Rewrite

> While we sadly couldn’t give you a Christmas present in the form of the `Buffer Cache Rewrite` (or BCR for short), the preliminary work needed to have it ready has started. [Rodrigo](https://github.com/ReinUsesLisp) has his hands full with cleaning up the TCR recently merged into Mainline, the current internal work and testing on the BCR, and his first steps with `Project Hades`. “Sleep is for the weak” indeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we sadly couldn’t give you a Christmas present in the form of the `Buffer Cache Rewrite` (or BCR for short), the preliminary work needed to have it ready has started. [Rodrigo](https://github.com/ReinUsesLisp) has his hands full with cleaning up the TCR recently merged into Mainline, the current internal work and testing on the BCR, and his first steps with `Project Hades`. *“Sleep is for the weak”* indeed.
```

{{< imgs
	"./rodrigo.png| And you don't seem to understand (Rodrigo sleeping)"
  >}} 

> We will go in-depth once BCR is completed, but one of the required features is [having access to Vulkan at all times](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5225) to make use of `interop`, a driver feature (or as Rodrigo calls it, a monstrosity) that allows developers to crosscode between different graphics APIs on Nvidia and AMD products. This way, [Vulkan can be used from OpenGL if it offers a better solution to a problem.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5230)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will go in-depth once BCR is completed, but one of the required features is [having access to Vulkan at all times](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5225) to make use of `interop`, a driver feature (or as Rodrigo calls it, a monstrosity) that allows developers to cross-code between different graphics APIs on Nvidia and AMD products. This way, [Vulkan can be used from OpenGL if it offers a better solution to a problem.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5230)
```

> A rather interesting change needed is [related](https://github.com/MerryMage/dynarmic/pull/566) to [Dynarmic](https://github.com/MerryMage/dynarmic). By [masking data in three lower pointer bits](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5249) before reading them, Rodrigo can store required information of the page tables without needing to use a lock, saving precious execution time and, at most, some 128MB of system memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A rather interesting change needed is [related](https://github.com/MerryMage/dynarmic/pull/566) to [Dynarmic](https://github.com/MerryMage/dynarmic). By [masking data in three lower pointer bits](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5249) before reading them, Rodrigo can now store required information of the page tables without needing to use a lock, saving precious execution time and, at most, some 128MB of system memory.
```

> Lastly, [additional granularity in the CPU pages.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5262) This Pull Request allows informing if the CPU or the GPU modified a range of data in the CPU page. If the specific range was modified by the CPU, it must be uploaded to the GPU. Processors supporting the `BMI1` instruction set will get a slim performance improvement, these include Intel Haswell (Gen. 4) or newer, and AMD Piledriver (2nd Gen. FX)/Jaguar or newer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lastly, [additional granularity in the CPU pages.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5262) This PR allows informing if the CPU or the GPU modified a range of data in the CPU page. If the specified range was modified by the CPU, it must be uploaded to the GPU. Processors supporting the `BMI1` instruction set will get a slim performance improvement, these include Intel Haswell (Gen. 4) or newer, and AMD Piledriver (2nd Gen. FX)/Jaguar or newer.
```

## Future projects

> It’s no surprise, but the `Buffer Cache Rewrite` is close to release. Vulkan performance and stability improvements are planned. Kernel improvements continue to be a high priority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s no surprise, but the `Buffer Cache Rewrite` is close to release. Vulkan performance and stability improvements are planned, with kernel improvements continuing to be a high priority.
```

title = "Progress Report December 2020"
author = "Honghoa"
coauthor = "GoldenX86"
forum = 0
+++ 

Happy New Year, dear yuz-ers! 2020 is finally behind us, so what better way to start 2021 than with a progress report? Follow us for a summary of the last changes yuzu saw in 2020, and a small preview of what will come. This time we offer you kernel changes, new input and user interface additions, and the first changes applied to get the Buffer Cache Rewrite finished.

<!--more-->

## General improvements and bug fixes

[epicboy](https://github.com/ameerj) has been busy squashing bugs, in this case [killing two with one PR.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5201) In some instances, we were trying to read data from an nvflinger buffer before it even existed. By adding a check addressing this, `Yoshi’s Crafted World` now boots, albeit with several graphical glitches.
This PR also fixes how buffers are accessed, so several games now boot for the first time. Some examples include: `Katana ZERO`, `DELTARUNE Chapter 1`, `Dragon Ball FighterZ` and `Wonder Boy: The Dragon’s Trap`.

{{< imgs
	"./katanazero.png| "
  >}}

{{< imgs
	"./wonderboy.png| Now booting!"
  >}}

> A PSA for our Intel graphics users, (at the time of writing) the latest `27.20.100.9126` Windows driver version adds support for not only the much needed `VK_EXT_robustness2`, but also `VK_EXT_custom_border_color` improving performance and stability with the former extension and solving rendering issues in `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild` in the latter. Nothing better than free improvements for our integrated graphics crew running Vulkan. Latest is best!

Reviewer 3: ```diff
- (at the time of writing) the latest 27.20.100.9126 
+ the latest (at the time of writing) 27.20.100.9126 
```

In the future, Early Access will finally be able to be distributed pre-compiled like this. Thanks to the reduced source code compilation work hours, the CPU Union approves of this change.

During the time the Texture Cache Rewrite spent in Early Access, several regressions have been fixed. One of the notorious ones is related to the camera rune in `The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild`.

{{< imgs
	"./camera.png| "
  >}}

As you can clearly see with [Rodrigo’s](https://github.com/ReinUsesLisp)... art, the game informs two different size values for the same texture, named `pitch` and `width`, so yuzu didn’t transfer needed information between them as it considered them different textures. By changing this behaviour, entities like animals, flowers, enemies, etc. are properly registered by the camera now.

{{< single-title-imgs

>     "Tony get the boulder (The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "Tony, get the boulder. (The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild)"
```

First, there is an improvement to yuzu [ensuring safe memory access across threads](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5206). A `Race Condition` happens when multiple threads are running simultaneously, and one thread modifies data while another thread accesses it. Race conditions can cause faulty or unexpected behaviour: a thread can retrieve partial data or even overwrite changes made by another. yuzu emulates the Nintendo Switch's internal memory using a type of abstract data structure called a `Page Table`, which works as a virtual layer between the physical and the emulated memory. It maps these addresses in a "contiguous table" that lets the programmer access memory easily without checking where actual memory stores everything. Most memory management operations were written before multicore CPU and asynchronous GPU were implemented. There was only a single thread back then, so there were no guards for thread-safe memory access. bunnei introduced a lock in this PR to alleviate a race condition where the data in the memory pages was being accessed while the GPU was operating on them.

> bunnei has also been rewriting the [kernel scheduler](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5131) to be based on `Mesosphere`, the Nintendo Switch kernel reimplementation of [Atmosphère](https://github.com/Atmosphere-NX/Atmosphere) (the custom firmware for the Nintendo Switch we recommend in our dumping guide). Modern operating systems run many processes simultaneously, however, a single CPU core can only process one of them at any given time. The scheduler is an elemental piece of the kernel, as it is in charge of swapping CPU access to the different processes and choosing in which order this happens. As Atmosphère is intended to run on the hardware, all its components are properly reverse engineered, which ensures our scheduler will behave correctly too. This PR will also facilitate porting other parts of Mesosphere in the future. This, in turn, will make yuzu's kernel match Horizon OS more closely. We all owe a big thank you to the people working on Atmosphère, as their reverse engineering efforts facilitate the work needed to implement these services in emulators.

Reviewer 3: ```diff
- The scheduler is an elemental piece of the kernel, 
+ The scheduler is an essential piece of the kernel, 
```

Reviewer 3: ```diff
all its components
all of its components
```

Analog triggers were sometimes mapped inverted to what the user intended. As a way to avoid some bad moments to our users, now [the program takes two samples when mapping an analog trigger,](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5265) to better determine the direction of movement. This was [ported from Citra](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/5509), so thanks, guys!

A few games like `Voez` and `The Room` require specific touch gestures, and to achieve that, [multitouch support was added.](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu/pull/5270) With this, yuzu now offers support for up to 16 touch inputs with the keyboard, touch screen or via UDP services.

{{< imgs
	"./room.png| "
  >}} 

## Preliminary work for the Buffer Cache Rewrite

While we sadly couldn’t give you a Christmas present in the form of the `Buffer Cache Rewrite` (or BCR for short), the preliminary work needed to have it ready has started. [Rodrigo](https://github.com/ReinUsesLisp) has his hands full with cleaning up the TCR recently merged into Mainline, the current internal work and testing on the BCR, and his first steps with `Project Hades`. *“Sleep is for the weak”* indeed.

{{< imgs

> 	"./rodrigo.png| And you don't seem to understand (Rodrigo sleeping)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	"./rodrigo.png| And you don't seem to understand... (Rodrigo sleeping)"
```
